How The Internet Works

It is impossible to deny the influence of the Internet. In the 1990's it quickly changed
from an exciting technology few understood to something so prevalent most can't
imagine living without it. The World Wide Web is a powerful thread that connects the
entire world, one that allows us to share information like never before.

The benefits of accessing so much information are too many to list, and while some
problems are also becoming apparent, the web's place in our daily lives is
undeniable. We can now access the Internet from our home computers, office,
laptops and our phones. But even with this close intimacy many people still aren't
entirely sure what the Internet is and how it really works. This guide explores these
questions, starting with a bit of history. 

Like most revolutionary ideas, the Internet
started with a few people who dared to dream the
impossible. The year was 1962 and Leonard
Kleinrock (pictured) at MIT had just published the
first paper on packet switching theory, which was
the technology that allows information to be
transferred as packets of information. At the same
time, a man named J.C.R. Licklider of MIT wrote a
series of memos describing a "Galactic Network,"
which would allow people to access information
from anywhere.

The story could have ended there. But, as it
happens, Licklider was the first head of the
computer research program at DARPA, the research and development office for
the U.S. Department of Defense, and convinced his successors that researching
networking processes was an important undertaking

In 1965, MIT researcher Lawrence G. Roberts, along with Thomas Merrill, connected
the TX-2 computer in Massachusetts to the Q-32 in California with a low speed
telephone line. This project, sponsored by ARPA, intended to study a "cooperative
network of time-sharing computers". That was the first time a long distance
computer network was created, and it helped show researchers that it could work—
although it also showed them how inadequate phone lines were for the transmission
of information. In 1966, using the knowledge he had acquired from his previous
experiment, Roberts put together plans for the creation of the "ARPANET", which
would eventually become the modern "Internet".The development of the ARPANET was not without major glitches. Charley Kline at
UCLA sent the first packet ever using the network as he tried to connect to Stanford
Research Institute on Oct 29, 1969. The first word he tried was LOGIN, but the system
crashed when he reached the letter G.

By 1972 Ray Tomlinson created email for the ARPANET and started using the symbol
"@" for email addresses.

In 1973, a protocol called FTP (File Transfer Protocol) was created to allow files to be
transferred to hosts as sites (more on that below). That is the protocol used today to
upload files to servers and websites.

By 1981, Listserv software made the exchange of information easier, and by the
1980's, the first private ISP (Internet Service Provider) appeared.
The Internet started to become broadly used in the 1990's. The first search engine—
Archie, from McGill University in Montreal—was created. This was followed in 1991 by
WAIS and Gopher.

Lycos was created in 1993 and Yahoo was founded in 1994, but the major change in
how people searched the web happened in 1998, with the launch of a clean and
efficient little search engine called Google.

Although Google cannot be credited with the development of the web since the
late 1990's, it serves as a major turning point in its popular acceptance. Within a
short time, "to Google" would become a verb synonym to searching the web.

During the 90's major investments had been made in the field of technology, and
investors and companies saw the web as the new portal for their investments. So
many of those investments went badly that 2000 is known as the year the dot-com
bubble burst, with the majority of the high investment dot-coms going down during
2001 and 2002.

The irony of the dot-com bubble burst is that the Internet would, in the years after
the burst, prove itself immensely profitable and a major focus of investments once
again.

It matured to become such a part of people's lives that it had begun to threaten
the existence of companies that refused to create a strong presence online.

From the users' end, computers are a direct link to the Internet. A computer with
Internet access is necessary for retrieving files served by websites. Most computers
are adequate for that task, but naturally as the web grows more and more complex
so does the computing power needed to take advantage of it. 

There are currently a few different types of cables that can be used to connect a
computer to the Internet. The most common ones are phone lines (for DSL and
modem users) and Broadband RJ-45 (ethernet) cables. The phone line can connect
users to a modem connection directly, or be connected to a router for DSL users,
and then to an RJ-45 cable. Broadband cable and T1 users don't use a phone line,
but use HFC and RFoG networks instead.Internet service providers are the companies that you pay to get Internet delivered
to your house or workplace, such as Time Warner Cable, Comcast or Verizon DSL.
They are the links between you and the large network we call the Internet, so by
paying a fee they can give you access to their infrastructure and connect you to
other computers. What you are really paying for is for the usage of their hardware:
their cables, computers, routers, modems, the workers who maintain them and the
real estate that is required to hold that hardware. 

The Internet itself and the information stored in it is, for the most part, free; without an
ISP, however, you would not have access to it.

The information you see online needs to be stored by computers called hosts, or
servers, which are constantly sending the information to the World Wide Web. Most
major web hosting companies have huge buildings with hundreds or thousands of
servers to store the websites they host. When you type a website address on your
browser, they receive the request and send out the information that appears on
your browser.

You can turn your own computer into a server, but it would probably serve the
pages slowly if many people are trying to access the site at once.

Websites, computers on a network and hosts are identified by a series of numbers
called IP addresses. Even your computer has an IP address; you can find it by visiting
sites such as http://whatismyipaddress.com/

Websites have public IP addresses, which are their identifiers online. For example, we
all know that to reach Google, you can type Google.com on the address bar.
Google's real IP is 66.102.7.99, so if you type that on the address bar, you will also
find Google.

This is how it works:
Let's say your address is 125 Happy Street, but you decide to put a sign on your door
that says "Bob's House", which covers the street number. You can then tell your
friends to look for "Bob's House", which would be easier for them to remember, but
your real address still is 125 Happy Street. In this analogy, then, "Bob's house" is your
Domain Name and 125 Happy Street is your IP number.

The domain name is basically the address of your website, a nickname for its IP
address. Domains can be assigned to IPs by a Domain Name Registry headed by
the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority.

Basically, you can go to a registrar, such as GoDaddy.com or NetworkSolutions.com,
purchase a domain and point it to where your site is hosted, so that when people
type in your web address, they are taken to your website.
Domains are divided into levels from right to left.

URLs are shortcuts to a particular part of a Domain Name. Although sometimes
people will use the two names interchangeably, there is a main difference. The
Domain Name includes all the URLs within that domain. The URL points to a particular
location.

The confusion exists because most people will say, what is the URL for the site and
they are given the simplest URL form, where the home of the site is (beholders.org),
which also happens to be the Domain Address of the site.

The URL usually includes much more information though, such as the specific page
address, folder name, and protocol language.

Protocols are different rules and languages that are used to exchange information
or data. Below are some examples of the most used web protocols.HTML (HyperText Language Markup) was developed around 1991 and originally had
20 tags. HTML has, almost since the beginning of websites, been one of the main
languages used to communicate information, particularly for the creation of
websites. HTML is considered a static language, because for the most part, what is
written on the page is displayed on the browser, with very little interactivity between
the user and that information.

Most sites in the world make use of at least some html to display their information,
although many larger sites being created today are connected to some form of
database and use other languages which are considered more "dynamic" than
HTML is. You can view the code on most webpages by using the view source option
in your browser. Most of what you will see is HTML, since dynamic sites hide their real
code when displayed that way for security reasons.Database driven sites are called "dynamic" sites because, unlike HTML, they don't
store the information that will appear on the pages on the code itself. The code of
dynamic sites is usually a portal to a database. They are what we call "queries".
What that means is that they are requests, or questions, that can be answered by a
database, which is where the real data is displayed. Dynamic sites can also write to
a database, and that conversation is what the dynamic sites display on the pages.

So for example, let's say that a dynamic site has a form to create a user for that site.
You type in your information and click "send" or "join", or a button of that sort. The
form will send that information to a database, and tell it to store it on a particular
part of the database with tags for your name, address, password, etc.

Then let's say you return to that site and try to log in. When you click login, the page
will send a request to the database that asks if that person exists in the database.
The database will search for it and if it finds that information if will reply that is does
and give you access to your information on the site. If it doesn't find you, it will tell
the page that there was an error and it will probably display a message instead,
such as: "User not found".

XML, or eXtensible Markup Language, had its beginnings in 1998 with XML 1.0. XML is
a markup language that is mostly used to structure documents and transfer data
between applications. It is also a language that can be used very effectively for
transfer of information between databases because it is so configurable.

Macromedia developed Flash in 1996 as a tool for the development of visually
dynamic websites and multimedia content. It filled a gap left by HTML, which was
quite static until the recent development of HTML5. With Flash, people can create
sites with moving elements, music and action script which only require one plugin
download to be viewed. It was widely adopted and by 2009 it had over 100 million
users. Its plugin can be found on most computers with Internet access.

Java is a programming language released by Sun Microsystems in 1995. It is a
platform that has been used for many web and non-web applications, such as
games and applications. Much like Flash, it requires software to be downloaded to
your computer in the form of a plugin.

Ajax stands for Asynchronous Javascript And XML, and is a reasonably recent
technology in its current form (although the core languages Ajax evolved from have
been around for a while.) Ajax was coined in 2005 by Jesse James Garrett.

What Ajax does is basically load information on a page without the need to click on
links and reload pages like HTML does. This helps make web pages more interactive,
and feel less like a series of documents. Due to this, AJAX is used by many ecommerce
sites or resource sites; it's a way of displaying extra images or text without
the user needing to browse to different pages.

No one organization controls the Internet; instead, a variety of international
organizations work to make it what it is. Let's take a brief look at a few of these
organizations. 

ICANN stands for Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers and as the
name implies, it is the main organization responsible for legislating and regulating the
parts of the web that have to do with domains and their connection to IP addresses.

IGF
The Internet Governance Forum was established in 2006 as a forum that runs under
the United Nations. It is a venue for discussions about the direction of the Internet on
a global level.

W3C
The World Wide Web Consortium is responsible for keeping standards in web protocol
development such as HTML and XML. Basically they specify the standards that
browsers use when supporting particular languages.

IANA
The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority is one of the oldest Internet regulatory
organizations, having started its activities in the 1970s. It is responsible for
coordinating IPs and registries and regulates how they work together.

The Internet has hugely affected print media. The possibility of having an online
magazine or newspaper that doesn't require publishers to print and transport hard
copies has made it easier for a lot of small publishers to create a presence online.

It has also made it necessary for major companies to have a website, since the
public has come to expect news to be served immediately, instead of the next day
or even weeks that is required for printed materials. It has also allowed individuals to
start their very own news sites and for blogs to fulfil part of the role that was
previously controlled solely by the printed media. Magazine and newspaper sales
are down, although their website traffic is going up. The launch of a new generation
of e-readers, such as the Kindle and the iPad are bound to impact printed materials
even more. Could we be watching the end of paper magazines?

Multimedia is one of the largest sectors of the Internet today. It encompasses
pictures, sound, video, animation and other interactive content. In its infancy the
Internet only allowed for sparse use of multimedia, due to its speed restriction and
the capacity of the machines to interact
with the content. Downloading even highly
compressed pictures (like the computer on
the left) could take minutes, so small,
pixilated images were the norm. The idea of
music and video seemed like a distant
dream. Bad Gif animations were the most
exciting things you would see on a site in
those days.

With the predominance of high speed
Internet the use of multimedia in websites
has become so common that one would
find it odd to see a site that didn't at least have pictures and graphic elements.

Sites devoted entirely to multimedia, such as YouTube and Vimeo, are incredibly
popular; music downloads have revolutionized the industry.

The movie industry has also been deeply affected by sites such as Netflix, which
make it possible for people to stream new movie releases directly to their computers.
Do you even remember video stores? Why would you bother when you can watch
a movie on the go on your phone?

Social networks are almost a synonym with the modern Internet. Since its creation,
the Internet had been used as a means of social interaction. Chat rooms were one
of the first venues for live communication among people that broke the barriers of
space much like the telephone when it was created. The difference was that chat
rooms created another form of interaction, where complete strangers would
randomly find each other to exchange ideas of all kinds.

The social format became widely known with the popularity of MySpace, which still
exists, although it seems to be slowly disappearing into obscurity. MySpace at its
peak in 2006 had 100 million avid users, and showed the world that there was a
huge interest in the use of the Internet as a live social medium.

Facebook is currently the leader of that trend, with over 500 million users. Businesses
have also discovered the importance of reaching potential customers through
social networks and are investing heavily in them. It is rare to find a business
nowadays that doesn't have at least a Facebook page and a Twitter account.

The need to be constantly connected has also prompted a lot of people and
businesses to set up Wi-Fi connections. Wi-Fi is based on IEEE 802.11 standards that
allow devices to connect to each other without the need for cables. One can easily
set up a wireless network with an affordable wireless router connected to a wired
one or directly to the broadband cable. That creates a lot of flexibility, particularly
for those who wish to use laptops around the house and businesses who want to be
able to set up computers without the need to worry about pulling cables all over the
office. Wi-Fi can also be found in many business and public spaces as a way of
attracting web users.

In the past few years, the need to be constantly connected has meant that new
ways of being online are constantly being researched. Mobile Internet has, in the
past few years become so popular that a large number of businesses are creating
websites and apps specifically for mobile devices. Phones, which used to be a
device that allowed you to make phone calls and maybe send some text messages,
have become miniature computers that not only give you access to the web, but
also allow you to create documents, manage your finances, record video, take
picture and share those online.

Blackberries, iPhones, iPad and more recently the invasion of Android and Android
tablets in the market has meant that Smart Phones will become an even larger part
of Internet connectivity. Unlike land-based connections, mobile devices rely greatly
on the use of Satellites to connect users to the Internet.

The changes in communications that can be attributed to the Internet are almost
immeasurable. Even from its humble beginnings as a limited communication portal
between researchers and scholars, the fact that the information could be shared so
freely was revolutionary. The web, as we so commonly call it, is exactly that:
something that connects all these points, and with that, all of us, and allows us to
influence each other and share ideas in ways that were impossible before.
As a child, when we were curious about something; we dreamed that there was a
magic box….one that could answer any questions asked. That magic box exists
now. Its name is Google.

The implications are immense. Ideas can be shared among people from all over the
world in real time. Newspapers have become "the old way of doing things" since
you can find information on events within seconds of their happening. Emails have
made letters a special thing one treasures instead of the only way of
communicating with one another without the use of a phone.

Websites have helped spread information that was previously only available in
books, which had to be shipped to places, and stored, and which only allowed that
information to be shared with the very few who had access to them in a library or
who had the funds to purchase them. Most websites are available for free to millions
of users at any given time.Businesses, hospitals and banks stopped relying on paper documents and started
"digitizing" all their files. Information can now be accessed via databases, which
means less is done by memory and subject to mistakes, or accidental destruction
and more people have access to the information quicker.

Whole infrastructures were developed so they could accommodate these changes.
Buildings have been built to accommodate servers, cables and satellites had to be
changed to better distribute the information, Internet based companies have
appeared that function entirely virtually, without the need for a brick and mortar
office. The measure of the development and potentials of many countries is being
measured side by side with the level and know-how of its technology, because
geographic barriers mean very little when the web is concerned. Basically, you can
reach someone across the world the same way you can chat with a friend in your
neighbourhood.

The last decade has been the most transformative in generations. A whole new way
of living has been created by the Internet, and it has started maturing in the past
years and evolving into a new norm. Some of the apparent changes, such as email
instead of mail and looking for websites instead of phone numbers in the yellow
pages were just the tip of the iceberg.

The media is changing its format to an almost entirely digital format. Magazines and
newspapers have been morphing into websites and blogs, videos are becoming
streaming media, and even TV has been slowly becoming more like the web.
Options like rewinding live TV, recording it, scheduling it from a distance, streaming
"On Demand" movies, and many other changes are a way of duplicating the users
experience online while they watch TV. Google TV, for example, is a gateway to a
fully web based TV watching experience.

Home phones are being slowly replaced by smart phones, which are again, an
extension of the web into our everyday lives. Even the home and business phones
themselves can now be web driven with VOIP services. Many applications and
documents are now being stored in web clouds which mean that soon, most of our
information will only exist in pixel form.

We have in the short span of 10 years, changed from a mostly analog world, to a
world controlled by virtual information and one can't help but wonder what the next
10 years will bring.

What the Internet has brought us is a whole new way of interacting with each other
and with the world around us. We have more access to information than any other
generation before us, but not all of the information is constructive and not all of the
changes good. Many have failed to adapt to our new virtualized environment, and
have been struggling to catch up with a world that seems to be changing quicker
than a lot of people can catch up with it, and those who had to explain to your
grandparents how to use Facebook can testify to it.

The other group that has been left behind by the technological revolution has been
those in poverty or who live in countries with little Internet access. It is estimated that
approximately 75% of people worldwide still don't have access to the Internet, and
with the needs to the world revolving around some of those services, the distance
between those who can and those who cannot is bound to become even greater.

For those of us who are privileged to have access to every new gadget and to
every new advancement, the world has become a great big experiment. We read
our books on Kindles, find directions via GPS on our phones, talk to our friends on
Facebook and post Twitter updates about our new Foursquare mayorships. We play
fantasy games with people around the world and carry thousands of songs on
players smaller than a deck of cards.